

An alphabet $\Sigma$ is a finite set of symbol, a string $s \in \Sigma^*$ is a finite sequence of symbols of $\Sigma$. $\Sigma^n$ denotes the set of all strings of length $n$. 

A language $L$ is a set of strings over an alphabet, so $L \subseteq \Sigma^*$. The main problem regarding languages is establishing if a given string belong to the language or not. The typical approach is to implicitly represents all strings belonging to the language defining a grammar.

A grammar is a tuple $G = (\Sigma, N, S, P)$ where:
- $\Sigma$ is the alphabet, or set of terminal symbols.
- $N$ is the set of non-terminal symbols.
- $S \in N$ is the starting symbol.
- $P$ is the set of productions, of the form $U \rightarrow V$, where $U \in (\Sigma \cup N)^+$ and $V \in (\Sigma \cup N)^*$.
A string $w \in \Sigma^*$ is generated by $G$ if there exists a derivation starting from $S$ and resulting in $w$ using the productions in $P$. $L(G)$ denotes the language generated by the grammar $G$.

The form of the productions give different types of grammars:
- Regular
- Context-free
- Context-sensitive
- Phrase-structure

Considering regular languages, they are equivalent to languages recognized by:
- DFA
- NFA
- $\epsilon$-NFA
- Regular expressions

A right regular grammar is a grammar where each production is of the form $A \rightarrow aB | a$ and only for $S$ it holds that $S \rightarrow \epsilon$.
The same can be said for left regular grammars.

A deterministic finite automata is a tuple $DFA = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)$ where:
- $Q$ is the set of states.
- $\Sigma$ is the alphabet.
- $\delta \subseteq Q \times \Sigma \rightarrow Q$ is the transition relation, returning a specific state.
- $q_0$ is the initial state.
- $F$ is the set of final states.
DFA can also be represented with a transition table, that associates each pair in $Q \times \Sigma$ to the corresponding resulting state.
An automata accept a word if starting from $q_0$ and applying $\delta$ for each character, the final state is in $F$.

$\hat{\delta}$ is the transitive closure of $\delta$, defined as 
$$
\hat{\delta} : Q \times \Sigma^* \rightarrow Q = \begin{cases}
	\hat{\delta}(q, \epsilon) = q\\
	\hat{\delta}(q,wa) = \delta(\hat{\delta}(q, w),a)
\end{cases}
$$
A string $x \in \Sigma^*$ is accepted iff $\hat{\delta}(q_0, x) \in F$, so $L(DFA) = \{x \in \Sigma^* | \hat{\delta}(q_0, x) \in F\}$.

A NFA allows more than one transition for a single character. Formally, a NFA is a tuple $NFA = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)$ where $\delta \subseteq Q \times \Sigma \rightarrow \mathbf{P}(Q)$. Again we can define $\hat{\delta}$ as the transitive closure of $\delta$ computed as 
$$
\hat{\delta} = \begin{cases}
	\hat{\delta}(q, \epsilon) = \{q\}\\
	\hat{\delta}(q,wa) = \cup_{p \in \hat{\delta}(q, w)} \delta(p, a)
\end{cases}
$$A string $x \in \Sigma^*$ is accepted iff $\hat{\delta}(q_0, x) \cap F \neq \emptyset$, so $L(DFA) = \{x \in \Sigma^* | \hat{\delta}(q_0, x) \cap F \neq \emptyset\}$.

For each right grammar $RG$ there exists a non deterministic finite automata $NFA$ such that $L(RG) = L(NFA)$.

Construction $RG \rightarrow NFA$:
Given $RG = (\Sigma, N, S, P)$, the corresponding NFA is $NFA = (N \cup \{F\}, \Sigma, \delta, S, F')$ where:
- $F$ is a newly added state.
- If $S \rightarrow \epsilon \in P$ then $F' = \{F\} \cup \{S\}$, else $F' = \{F\}$.
- If $A \rightarrow a \in P$, then $\delta(A, a) = F$,  if $A \rightarrow aB \in P$, then $\delta(A, a) = B$.

For each non deterministic finite automata $NFA$ there exists a right regular grammar $RG$ such that $L(NFA) = L(RG)$.

Construction $NFA \rightarrow RG$:
Given $NFA = (Q, \Sigma, \delta, q_0, F)$, the corresponding RG is $RG = (\Sigma, Q, q_0, P)$ where:
- If $\delta(A, a) = B$, then $A \rightarrow aB \in P$.
- If $\delta(A,a) \in F$, then $A \rightarrow a \in P$.
- If $q_0 \in F$ then $q \rightarrow q_0 | \epsilon \in P$ else $q \rightarrow q_0 \in P$.

For each NFA $N$ there is a DFA $D$ such that $L(N) = L(D)$.

Construction $NFA \rightarrow DFA$ (Powerset construction):
Given $NFA = (Q_N, \Sigma, \delta_N, q_0, F_N)$ the corresponding DFA is $DFA = (Q_D, \Sigma, \delta_D, q_0, F_D)$ where:
- $Q_D = \mathbb{P}(Q_N)$
- $\delta_D(P, a) = \cup_{p \in P}\delta_N(p, a)$
- $F_D = \{P \in \mathbb{P}(Q_N) | P \cap F \neq \emptyset\}$ 
It is possible and common that many states are actually unreachable.

Since DFAs are NFAs, there is no need to define a construction algorithm.

$\epsilon$-NFA are an extension of NFA that allows for spontaneous transitions. Every state loops with $\epsilon$, but they are also allowed to perform an external transition. So, $\delta : Q \times (\Sigma \cup \{\epsilon\} \rightarrow \mathbb{P}(Q)$. Also, we define the $\epsilon$-closure of $q \in Q$ as the set of all states reachable from $q$ with an $\epsilon$ transition. The transitive closure of $\delta$ is therefore defined as:

$$
\hat{\delta} = \begin{cases}
	\hat{\delta}(q, \epsilon) = \epsilon \text{-closure}(q)\\
	\hat{\delta}(q,wa) = \cup_{p \in \hat{\delta}(q, w)} \epsilon \text{-closure}(\delta(p, a))
\end{cases}
$$
For each $\epsilon$-NFA $E$ there exists an NFA $N$ such that $L(E) = L(N)$.

Construction $\epsilon-NFA \rightarrow DFA$:
Given $\epsilon-NFA = (Q, \Sigma, \delta_E, q_0, F_E)$ the corresponding DFA is $DFA = (Q, \Sigma, \delta_N, q_0, F_N)$ where:
- $\delta_N(q, a) = \hat{\delta}_E(q,a)$
- If $\epsilon-closure(q_0) \cap F \neq \emptyset$ then $F_N = F_E \cup \{q_0\}$, else $F_N = F_E$.

Since NFA are $\epsilon$-NFA where all states can only loop with $\epsilon$, there is no need to define a construction algorithm.

A regular expression implicitly denotes a language. Given an alphabet $\Sigma$, the following constant are regular expressions:
- $\emptyset$ 
- $\epsilon$
- $a \in \Sigma$
and if $r$ and $s$ are regular expressions, then also the following are regular expressions:
- $r+s$
- $rs$
- $r^*, s^*$
$L(r)$ denotes the language defined by $r$.

For each DFA $D$, there exists a regular expression $r$ such that $L(D)=L(r)$.

Construction $DFA \rightarrow r$:
1) Eliminates the states of the automata replacing their edges with regular expressions that represent paths.
2) When the automata contains only one initial and final state, define the corresponding regular expression.
3) If more than one final state is present, then repeat the process considering each time a different single final state, and take as regular expression the sum of the resulting regular expressions.

For each regular expression $r$, there exists a $\epsilon$-NFA $N$ such that $L(r)=L(N)$.

Construction $r \rightarrow N$:
- $r = a$ becomes a NFA where the initial node is linked to the final node with $a$.
- $r = \epsilon$ becomes a NFA where the initial node is also final.
- $r = \emptyset$ becomes a NFA with an initial node and no final state.
- $r + s$ becomes a NFA where the initial node can $\epsilon$-transit into the NFA of $r$ or $s$, and both final states $\epsilon$-transit into a single final state.
- $rs$ becomes a NFA where the initial node is the initial node of $r$ and the final node of $r$ $\epsilon$-transit into the initial node of $s$. The final node is the final node of $s$.
- $r^*$ becomes a NFA where the initial node can $\epsilon$-transit directly into the new final state or into the initial state of $r$. The final state of $r$ can $\epsilon$-transit into the initial state of $r$ or into the new final node.

Pumping lemma: given an infinite regular language $L$, there exists $k \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $\forall s \in L. |s| \ge k$ it is possible to split $s$ into three parts, $s = uvw$ such that $|uv| < k, |v| > 0$ and $\forall i \in \mathbb{N}. uv^iw \in L$.

The pumping lemma gives a necessary condition, so if a language does not satisfy the theorem, then it cannot be a regular language. Particularly it must hold that $\forall k \in \mathbb{N}. \exists s \in L. \forall u, v, w \in \Sigma^*. s = uvw. \exists i \in \mathbb{N}. uv^iw \notin L$.

Regular languages are closed under union, concatenation, intersection and Kleene closure, and approximately all properties are decidable in case of finite automata, like emptiness, non-emptiness, finiteness, infiniteness, membership.

Given a DFA $D$, it is possible to minimize it into another equivalent DFA. The minimization revolves around the definition of distinct states. Two states $p, q \in Q$ are distinct if:
- $p \in F \land q \notin F$ or vice versa.
- $\exists a \in \Sigma. \delta(p,a) \neq \delta(q,a)$

DFA minimization:
1) Create an empty lower triangular table
2) $\forall (p,q). T(p,q) = \epsilon$ if one of the two state is final and the other not.
3) Until no change in the table, for any pair $(p,q)$, if $T(p,q)$ is empty and $\exists a \in \Sigma. T(\delta(p,a), \delta(q,a))$ is not empty then $T(p,q) = a$.
4) Finally, the empty pairs are equivalent nodes.
This algorithm has complexity $O(kn^2)$.

A grammar $G = (\Sigma, N, S, P)$ is context-free if all the productions are of the form $U \rightarrow V$, where $U \in N$ and $V \in (\Sigma \cup N)^*$, and only $S \rightarrow \epsilon$. 
For a given grammar $G$, the parse tree is the graph representation of a derivation, where:
- Each node is labelled with $\Sigma \cup N \cup \{\epsilon\}$
- The root and internal node are labelled by $N$.
- If a node is labelled with $A$ and has children $X_1,...,X_n$, then the production $A \rightarrow X_1...X_n \in P$
- Leaf are labelled by $\epsilon$.

Context-free grammars can be recognized by pushdown automata, that can perform three operations:
- Push: add a new symbol to the stack
- Pop: read and remove the top symbol from the stack
- Empty: verifies if the stack is empty

Formally, a pushdown automata is a tuple $M = (Q, \Sigma, R, \delta, q_0, Z_0, F)$ where:
- $R$ is the set of stack symbols
- $\delta : Q \times (\Sigma \cup \{\epsilon\}) \times R \rightarrow \mathbb{P}(Q \times R^*)$ is the transition function.
- $Z_0$ is the starting symbol of the stack.
The evolution of a PDA is defined by triples $(q,w,y)$ where:
- $q$ is the current state
- $w$ is the remaining input
- $y$ is the current content of the stack
and $(q_0, aw, Zr) \rightarrow (q_1, w, Yr) \iff (q_1, Y) \in \delta(q_0, a, Z)$

The accepted language of a pushdown automata can be defined in terms of an empty stack or not:
- $L_p(M) = \{x \in \Sigma^* | (q_0, x, Z_0) \rightarrow^* (q, \epsilon, \epsilon), q \in Q\}$
- $L_f(M) = \{x \in \Sigma^* | (q_0, x, Z_0) \rightarrow^* (q, \epsilon, \gamma), q \in F, \gamma \in R^*\}$ 

Pumping lemma for context-free grammars: given a context-free language $L$, there exist $k \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $\forall s in L. |s| \ge k$ it is possible to split $s$ into five parts, $s = uvwxy$ with $|vwx| \le k, |vx| > 0$ such that $\forall i \in \mathbb{N}. uv^iwx^iy \in L$.
Again, the pumping lemma for CF languages can be used to prove that a language is not context-free. Particularly, it must hold that $\forall k \in \mathbb{N}. \exists s \in L. \forall u,v,w,x,y \in \Sigma^*. s = uvwxy. \exists i \in \mathbb{N}. uv^iwx^iy \notin L$.

Context-free languages are closed under union, concatenation, Kleene closure but not under intersection. Also, almost all properties are decidable, like:
- Emptiness
- Non-emptiness
- Finiteness
- Infiniteness
- Membership

Context-sensitive grammars are grammars where the productions are of the form $U \rightarrow V$, where $|U| \le |V|$.