
The parser takes in input the stream of token generated by the scanner (each one associated to the corresponding lexeme, if necessary) and determines if the input is well formed. The result is an IR of the original program.
Parsing revolves around the construction of a derivation for the input program. The most interesting derivations are:
- Leftmost derivation: replace the leftmost non-terminal symbol at each step
- Rightmost derivation: replace the rightmost non-terminal symbol at each step
Precisely, a derivation is a sequence of rewrite steps where each $\gamma_i$ is a sentence if it does not contain a non-terminal, otherwise it is called sentential form. It holds that $\gamma_i$ follows $\gamma_{i-1}$ if $\gamma_i$ is obtained by expanding a non-terminal $A \in \gamma_{i-1}$ using $A \rightarrow \beta$, replacing the occurrence of $A$ with $\beta$. In the case of a leftmost derivation, $A$ should be the leftmost non-terminal.

Different application of derivations leads to different parse trees, resulting in ambiguity in the evaluation order of operators. To impose precedence, there must exists a non-terminal symbol for each level of precedence, isolate the part of the grammar related to a specific order of precedence and force the parser to recognize high precedence subexpression first (deepest definition, higher precedence).

If a grammar has more than one leftmost/rightmost derivation for a single sentential form, then it is ambiguous, but the leftmost and the rightmost derivation may differ. Ambiguity arises from confusion in the grammar itself, but also in the context where productions can be applied (overloading).

Top-down parsing: starting from the root of the parse tree (the starting symbol of the grammar), until the fringe of the parse tree is not the input program, for a node labelled by $A$, select one of its productions, adding children to $A$ for each symbol in the result of the production. If a terminal symbol is added but it doesn't match the input, backtrack. Obviously the most important aspect is the right choice of the production. Wrong choices of the productions can lead to non-termination.

A grammar is left-recursive if $\exists A \in N$ such that it exists a derivation $A \rightarrow^+ A \alpha$, for some $\alpha \in (N \cup \Sigma)^*$. Top-down parser cannot handle left-recursive grammars, as they lead to non-termination. The solution is to refactor the grammar into a right-recursive grammar, by adding new syntactic categories that are used to eliminate the left-recursive part. However, this allows only to remove immediate left-recursion. Generally, every production $A_i \rightarrow A_j\gamma$ should be replaced with $A_i \rightarrow \delta_1\gamma | \cdots | \delta_k\gamma$ if $A_j \rightarrow \delta_1 | \cdots | \delta_k$, and apply the previous technique to $A_i$. The newly added non-terminals are inserted at the end of the order.

To pick the current production, lookahead of the input is necessary, ideally an arbitrarily large amount. However, LL(1) and LR(1) grammars are enough.

An LL grammar is a context-free grammar that can be parsed by a LL parser, that parses following a leftmost derivation. For a fixed $k$, LL($k$) is a LL grammar that can predict the right production to apply by looking ahead at most of $k$ tokens.

$first(\alpha)$ is the set of tokens that appears as the first symbol in some string that derives from $\alpha$, so $x \in first(\alpha) \iff \exists \gamma. \alpha \rightarrow^* x\gamma$. If $A \rightarrow \alpha | \beta$, then $first(\alpha) \cap first(\beta) = \emptyset$, as otherwise the lookahead wouldn't be enough to distinguish between the two possible productions.

$follow(A)$ is the set of terminal symbols that can immediately follow $A$ in a sentential form. Then $first^+(A \rightarrow \alpha) = first(\alpha) \cup follow(A)$ if $\epsilon \in first(\alpha)$, otherwise $first^+(A \rightarrow \alpha) = first(\alpha)$.

Then a grammar is LL(1) iff. $first^+(A \rightarrow \alpha) \cap first^+(A \rightarrow \beta) = \emptyset$

LL(1) grammars are called predictive grammars, because the parser can predict the correct production just by looking at the current input and at the single lookahead.

Not all grammars are LL(1) and either can be turned into LL(1), the positive case is when $A \rightarrow \alpha \beta_1 | \alpha \beta_2$ can be turned into $A \rightarrow \alpha A'$ and $A' \rightarrow \beta_1 | \beta_2$, and now if $first^+(A' \rightarrow \beta_1) \cap first^+(A \rightarrow \beta_2) \neq \emptyset$, then the grammar can be LL(1) 